doc: Added release notes for 3.3.0 (#27915)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/releases_and_maturity/releases/release-notes-3.3.0.rst

  * :ref:`nrf_rpc_protocols_serialization_server`

Thread samples
--------------

* Added support for the nRF54L Series DKs in the following Thread sample documents:

  * :ref:`coap_client_sample`
  * :ref:`coap_server_sample`

* Removed all application-specific snippets from the Thread samples.
  Refer to the `migration guide <Migration guide for nRF Connect SDK v3.3.0_>`_ to see the list of changes.

Wi-Fi samples
-------------

* Added:

  * The :ref:`wifi_p2p_sample` sample that demonstrates how to establish a Wi-Fi Peer-to-Peer (P2P) connection using Wi-Fi Direct®, supporting both Client (CLI) mode and Group Owner (GO) mode operations.
  * Support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b/cpuapp`` board target variant to all Wi-Fi samples.

Other samples
-------------

* Added support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b`` board target variant in the :ref:`coremark_sample` sample.

Drivers
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`driver <drivers>`.

* Added the :ref:`uart_driver` documentation.
* Updated the ``nrfx_gppi`` API to now have full support on the application core of the nRF54H20 device.
  Using DPPI does not require the devicetree configuration.

> 

Reviewer: For Wi-Fi drivers please add below entries: Both are related to Wi-Fi SR co-existence, for $1 we don't need to mention in the migration guide as its simple a Kconfig mentioned in changelog.

1. Wi-Fi coexistence functionality is disabled by default. To enable it please use `CONFIG_NRF70_SR_COEX=y` in the Kconfig.

2. Added functionality to optionally insert Wi-Fi idle windows of configurable time (ms) using `CONFIG_NRF70_BT_SLOT_TIME` after each channel scan. This depends on `CONFIG_NRF70_SR_COEX`.

    This particular configuration is not yet deprecated, as the DTS alternative is not yet available.

Memfault integration
--------------------

* Added:

  * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_POST_INITIAL_HEARTBEAT_ON_NETWORK_CONNECTED` Kconfig option to control whether an initial heartbeat is sent when the device connects to a network
    This shows the device status and initial metrics in the Memfault dashboard soon after boot.
  * Support for recording location metrics when using external cloud location services (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_EXTERNAL`).

* Updated Memfault to version 1.37.1.
  See the `Memfault firmware SDK changelog`_ for details.

nRF Cloud integration
---------------------

* Updated by enabling a transform request for topic prefix and pairing during connection initialization to nRF Cloud in the MQTT finite state machine (FSM).
* Fixed a hang in the nRF Cloud log backend caused by incorrect error handling.
  When the semaphore cannot be acquired, the function now returns the original size instead of 0, allowing the logging system to proceed correctly.

MCUboot
=======

> The MCUboot fork in |NCS| (``sdk-mcuboot``) contains all commits from the upstream MCUboot repository up to and including ``8d14eebfe0b7402ebdf77ce1b99ba1a3793670e9``, with some |NCS| specific additions.

Author: @nvlsianpu  - Please confirm if the MCUboot commit is correct. Also, if any updates are required in this section.

Reviewer 2: no change in SHA.

The code for integrating MCUboot into |NCS| is located in the :file:`ncs/nrf/modules/mcuboot` folder.

The following list summarizes both the main changes inherited from upstream MCUboot and the main changes applied to the |NCS| specific additions:

|no_changes_yet_note|

Zephyr
======

.. NOTE TO MAINTAINERS: All the Zephyr commits in the below git commands must be handled specially after each upmerge and each nRF Connect SDK release.

The Zephyr fork in |NCS| (``sdk-zephyr``) contains all commits from the upstream Zephyr repository up to and including ``93b5f19f994b9a9376985299c1427a1630f6950e``, with some |NCS| specific additions.

> For the list of upstream Zephyr commits (not including cherry-picked commits) incorporated into |NCS| since the most recent release, run the following command from the :file:`ncs/zephyr` repository (after running ``west update``):

Author: @rlubos - Please confirm if the zephyr commit and below commands are correct?

Reviewer 3: Both commit and commands below are correct.

Modem-related libraries and versions
====================================

.. list-table:: Modem-related libraries and versions
   :widths: 15 10
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Library name
     - Version information
   * - Modem library
     - `Changelog <Modem library changelog for v3.3.0_>`_
   * - LwM2M carrier library
     - `Changelog <LwM2M carrier library changelog for v3.3.0_>`_

Migration notes
***************

See the `Migration guide for nRF Connect SDK v3.3.0`_ for the changes required or recommended when migrating your application from |NCS| v3.2.0 to |NCS| v3.3.0.

Known issues
************

Known issues are only tracked for the latest official release.
See `known issues for nRF Connect SDK v3.3.0`_ for the list of issues valid for the latest release.

.. _ncs_release_notes_330_changelog:

Changelog
*********

The following sections provide detailed lists of changes by component.

IDE, OS, and tool support
=========================

* Updated the required `SEGGER J-Link`_ version to v9.24a.

Bootloaders and DFU
===================

* Added:

  * A new lifecycle state (LCS) API designed for nRF54L Series devices.

>   * Support for firmware loader updates using the :ref:`installer` application.

Reviewer 2: ... in Single Slot DFU scheme.

>   * Support for firmware loader updates using the :ref:`installer` application.

Reviewer 2: Can this be updated?
```suggestion
  * Support for firmware loader updates using the :ref:`installer` application in Single Slot DFU scheme.
```

    Affected samples:

    * :ref:`nrf_desktop`
    * :ref:`fast_pair_locator_tag`
    * :ref:`mcuboot_with_encryption`
    * :ref:`single_slot_sample`
    * :ref:`nrf_smp_svr_sample`
    * :ref:`mcuboot_minimal_configuration`

  * Replaced ``ExternalNcsVariantProject_Add(..)`` CMake function with the ``ExternalZephyrVariantProject_Add(..)`` function.
    The new function is defined and maintained in the Zephyr repository, providing a very similar API and functionality.
    The old function is deprecated and kept for backward compatibility, but it will be removed in the future.

  * Moved the UUID configuration for the MCUboot images from the Kconfig options to the devicetree.
    The UUIDs are now defined in the devicetree overlay files for each image.
    For more information, see the :ref:`mcuboot_config`.

* :ref:`nrf_smp_svr_sample` sample:

  * Updated by moving the sample to the :file:`samples/dfu/smp_svr` folder.

* :ref:`firmware_loader_entrance` sample:

  * Added the :ref:`sample documentation page <firmware_loader_entrance>`.

* :ref:`mcuboot_with_encryption` sample:

  * Added support for the nRF54H20 SoC.

> 

Reviewer 2: * Added implementation of USB firmware loader :ref:`fw_loader_usb_mcumgr`, which is possible to by selected for a sysbuild project by enabling the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_FIRMWARE_LOADER_IMAGE_USB_MCUMGR` Kconfig option.  

* Added support for ``nRF54L15tag`` board target with MCUboot dual bank scheme. 
* Added experimental support for ``nRF54LM20dongle`` with MCUboot singel slot scheme and USB buttonless DFU support with the firmware loader.
* Glitch detector is enabled when |NSIB| is running on nRF54L15 SoC.
* DFU on nRF54LM20a is no longer experimental and is now fully supported and ready to be used. nRF54LM20b SoCs is supported right away. 
* Added experimental support for nRF54LS05b SoC.
* The MCUboot RAM load mode become fully supported
* The MCUboot firmware loader mode so Single Slot DFU become fully supported.

    The :ref:`API documentation section for the cryptographic drivers <crypto_drivers_api_documentation>` has been updated accordingly.
  * Support for storing AES Key Wrap (AES-KW) keys in the KMU.

* Updated:

  * The :ref:`ug_kmu_provisioning_production_metadata` section to reflect bit-field size changes in the :c:struct:`kmu_metadata` structure.
  * The :ref:`API documentation section for the cryptographic drivers <crypto_drivers_api_documentation>` with links to the added API documentation for the CRACEN driver.
  * The Oberon PSA Crypto to version 1.5.4 that introduces support for the following new features with the Oberon PSA driver:

    * Support for PSA Certified Crypto API v1.4, PSA Crypto API v1.4 PQC Extension and PSA Crypto Driver Interface v1.0 alpha 1.
    * Experimental support for Extendable-Output Function (XOF) algorithms SHAKE128, SHAKE256, ASCON XOF128 and ASCON CXOF128.
    * Experimental support for hash ML-DSA and deterministic ML-DSA asymmetric signature algorithms.
    * Experimental support for ASCON HASH256 hash algorithm.
    * Experimental support for ASCON AEAD128 AEAD algorithm.

>     * Updated implementations of WPA3-SAE, ML-DSA and ML-KEM to support the PSA Crypto API v1.4.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * Implementations of WPA3-SAE, ML-DSA and ML-KEM to support the PSA Crypto API v1.4.
```

Enhanced ShockBurst (ESB)
-------------------------

* Added:

  * Experimental support for concurrent operation of ESB with other radio protocols using the :ref:`mpsl_timeslot` feature.
  * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_ESB_CLOCK_INIT` Kconfig option.
    When this option is enabled, the :c:func:`esb_init` function automatically starts the required high-frequency clock and applies platform-specific errata workarounds.
    Applications that manage clocks independently can leave this option disabled (default).

* Fixed invalid radio configuration for legacy ESB protocol.

Matter
------

* Added support for nRF54LM20B SoC in Matter samples and applications.
* Updated:

  * The :ref:`matter_test_event_triggers_default_test_event_triggers` section with the new Closure Control cluster test event triggers.
  * Decreased Matter OTA image transfer time by around 15%.
  * By enabling PSA Crypto support by default, even when Wi-Fi is enabled.
  * The :ref:`ug_matter_platform_and_dmp` page with the certification ID granted for Nordic Matter Compliant Platform working with the Matter 1.5.0 version.

>   * The `nWP049 - Matter over Thread: Power consumption and battery life`_ and `Online Power Profiler for Matter over Thread`_ to include data for the nRF54LM20A and nRF54LM20B SoC.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * The `Matter over Thread power consumption and battery measurements <nWP049 - Matter over Thread: Power consumption and battery life_>`_ and `Online Power Profiler for Matter over Thread`_ to include data for the nRF54LM20A and nRF54LM20B SoC.
```

* Deprecated the secure persistent storage backend enabled with the :option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_SECURE_STORAGE_BACKEND` Kconfig option.

Thread
------

* Added:

  * A warning when using precompiled OpenThread libraries with modified Kconfig options related to the OpenThread stack.
  * The otperf tool that is compatible with zperf and iperf for measuring throughput of thread transmissions.
    For more details, see :ref:`ug_otperf_tool`.
  * Support for nRF54LM20B SoC in Thread samples.

Wi-Fi®
------

* Added:

>   * deprecated Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) support for backward compatibility with legacy networks.

Reviewer 5: Please remove word `deprecated`.

    On the ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l15/cpuapp`` board target, the maximum measured stack usage is 936 bytes.

* :ref:`central_uart` sample:

  * Added support for the ``nrf54lm20dongle/nrf54lm20b/cpuapp`` board target.

* :ref:`peripheral_ams_client` sample:

  * Added support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20a/cpuapp`` and ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20a/cpuapp/ns`` board targets.

* :ref:`peripheral_ancs_client` sample:

  * Added support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20a/cpuapp`` and ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20a/cpuapp/ns`` board targets.

* :ref:`peripheral_hids_keyboard` sample:

  * Added support for the ``nrf54ls05dk/nrf54ls05b/cpuapp`` board target.

  * Updated:

    * The sample's configuration to limit the number of supported HID reports (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_HIDS_FEATURE_REP_MAX`, :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_HIDS_INPUT_REP_MAX`, and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_HIDS_OUTPUT_REP_MAX`) and the maximum number of GATT attribute descriptors (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_HIDS_ATTR_MAX`) in the :ref:`hids_readme`.
      This reduces the memory consumption of the sample.

>     * The sample by renamig the sample-specific Kconfig options to use the ``SAMPLE_`` prefix to follow the Kconfig naming convention for samples.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * The sample by renaming the sample-specific Kconfig options to use the ``SAMPLE_`` prefix to follow the Kconfig naming convention for samples.
```

* :ref:`power_profiling` sample:

  * Loaded radio firmware into radio core RAM instead of global MRAM for nRF54H20 power optimization.

* :ref:`ble_throughput` sample:

  * Updated the frame space to improve throughput.

Bluetooth Mesh samples
----------------------

* :ref:`ble_mesh_dfu_distributor` sample:

  * Added a force disconnect of the mesh after provisioning to ensure the apps reconnect through the proxy service.
    This is a workaround for apps that do not properly close the PB-GATT connection after provisioning, especially after DFU.
    Disable :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_MESH_DK_PROV_PB_GATT_DISCONNECT` to restore old behavior.

* :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_lc` sample with :file:`overlay-dfu.conf` enabled:

  * Added a force disconnect of the mesh after provisioning to ensure the apps reconnect through the proxy service.
    This is a workaround for apps that do not properly close the PB-GATT connection after provisioning, especially after DFU.
    Disable :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_MESH_DK_PROV_PB_GATT_DISCONNECT` to restore old behavior.

* :ref:`bluetooth_mesh_light_lc` sample:

  * Updated the approach to build the sample with EMDS support.

>     There is no ``overlay-emds.conf`` anymore.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    There is no :file:`overlay-emds.conf` anymore.
```

  * Updated shadow handling by removing the shadow type ``Accepted`` and added ``Transform`` request event handling.
    Delta events can now handle error cases using the ``/shadow/update/delta/trim/err`` and ``/shadow/update/delta/full/err`` topics in nRF Cloud.

Cryptography samples
--------------------

* Added the :ref:`crypto_aes_kw` sample.

* :ref:`crypto_aes_ccm` sample:

  * Added support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20a/cpuapp`` board target.

DECT NR+ samples
----------------

* Added:

  * The :ref:`hello_dect` sample for demonstrating the use of the DECT NR+ stack with connection manager and IPv6 connectivity.
  * The :ref:`dect_shell_application` sample with the utilities for testing the DECT NR+ networking stack and modem features.

* :ref:`dect_phy_shell_application` sample:

  * Updated:

    * The ``dect rf_tool`` command - Major updates to improve usage for RX and TX testing.
    * Scheduler - Dynamic flow control based on load tier to prevent modem out-of-memory errors.
    * Settings - Continuous Wave (CW) support and possibility to disable Synchronization Training Field (STF) on TX and RX.

DFU samples
-----------

> 

Reviewer 2: * Updated

  * the :ref:`single_slot_sample` sample:

    * configuration for demonstrating DFU on the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` and ``nrf54lm20dongle/nrf54lm20b/cpuapp`` boards target using the :ref:`fw_loader_ble_mcumgr` firmware loader.
    * support for entering the firmware loader mode using applications's USB CDC ACM virtual serial port and SMP MCUmgr reset command with boot-mode selection.
      Avilable for the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` and ``nrf54lm20dongle/nrf54lm20b/cpuapp`` boards targets.

* Added:

> 

Reviewer 2: * :ref:`nrf_compression_mcuboot_compressed_update`, :ref:`single_slot_sample sample`, :ref:`nrf_smp_svr_sample` and :ref:`mcuboot_minimal_configuration` samples:

    * Added support for the ``nrf54ls05dk/nrf54ls05b/cpuapp`` board target.

  * The :ref:`mcuboot_minimal_configuration` sample: size-optimized configuration for ``nrf54ls05dk/nrf54ls05b/cpuapp`` with EC P256 signature support.

  * The :ref:`fw_loader_usb_mcumgr` sample, which provides a minimal configuration for firmware loading using SMP over the USB CDC ACM virtual serial port.
    The sample serves as a starting point for developing custom firmware loader applications that work with the MCUboot bootloader.
    To enable this firmware loader implementation, use the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_FIRMWARE_LOADER_IMAGE_USB_MCUMGR` Kconfig option.
  * Support for using the :ref:`fw_loader_usb_mcumgr` sample with the :ref:`single_slot_sample`.
    You can test this configuration on the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` board.

> 

Reviewer 2: * The :ref:`mcuboot_with_encryption` sample: added support for the :zephyr:board:`nrf54h20dk` board target along with autogenarted ITS signature key.
  * The :ref:`nrf_smp_svr_sample` sample: added UUID configuration for ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l15/cpuapp``, ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l10/cpuapp``, ``nrf54l15dk/nrf54l05/cpuapp``, ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20a/cpuapp``, and ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b/cpuapp`` board targets.

* :ref:`nrf_compression_mcuboot_compressed_update` sample:

  * Added support for the ``nrf54ls05dk/nrf54ls05b/cpuapp`` board target.

* :ref:`single_slot_sample` sample:

  * Updated the sample configuration for demonstrating DFU on the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` board target using the :ref:`fw_loader_ble_mcumgr` firmware loader.

> 

Reviewer 2: this is for  :ref:`single_slot_sample` sample as well:
    * support for entering the firmware loader mode using applications's USB CDC ACM virtual serial port and SMP MCUmgr reset command with boot-mode selection.
      Avilable for the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` and ``nrf54lm20dongle/nrf54lm20b/cpuapp`` boards targets.

  * Support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b/cpuapp`` board target in all ESB samples.

* Updated all ESB samples to use the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_ESB_CLOCK_INIT` Kconfig option for automatic HF clock management, removing the manual clock initialization code from the :file:`main.c` files.

Matter samples
--------------

* Updated:

  * The documentation for all Matter samples and applications to make it more consistent and easier to maintain and read.
  * Partitions mapping for the nRF7002 DK in all Matter samples.
    See the `migration guide <Migration guide for nRF Connect SDK v3.3.0_>`_ for more information.

* :ref:`matter_light_switch_sample` sample:

  * Removed the ``lit_icd`` snippet from the sample and enabled LIT ICD configuration by default.

* :ref:`matter_manufacturer_specific_sample` sample:

  * Added support for the ``NRF_MATTER_CLUSTER_INIT`` macro.

* :ref:`matter_closure_sample` sample:

  * Added support for the Closure Control cluster test event triggers.

* :ref:`matter_lock_sample` sample:

  * Added:

    * Support for the :ref:`matter_lock_sample_wifi_thread_switching` in the nRF54LM20 DK with the nRF7002-EB II shield attached.

>     * Lock data storage implementation based on the ARM PSA Protected Storage API, enabled with the ``CONFIG_LOCK_ACCESS_STORAGE_PROTECTED_STORAGE`` Kconfig option.

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't this option be defined as part of sample docs? It is mentioned here also and not linking (fyi @peknis ) https://ncsbmdoc.z6.web.core.windows.net/ncs/PR-27915/nrf/samples/matter/lock/README.html#door-lock-credentials

Reviewer 6: Will discuss this with the Matter people and have the Configuration options section added to fix this.

Reviewer 6: Opened https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/28159. When it goes in, this Kconfig option is linkable with :option:

Author: Changed the Kconfg option to :option: as the Kconfig is now defined in the sample docs.

* :ref:`download_sample` sample:

  * Updated board-specific configuration files to explicitly enable ECDH/ECDSA and RSA certificate support.

* :ref:`http_server` sample:

  * Updated TLS overlay files to explicitly enable ECDH/ECDSA and RSA certificate support.

* :ref:`https_client` sample:

  * Updated the TF-M overlay for the nRF91 Series to explicitly enable ECDH/ECDSA and RSA certificate support.

* :ref:`mqtt_sample` sample:

  * Updated TLS overlay files to explicitly enable ECDH/ECDSA and RSA certificate support.

NFC samples
-----------

* Updated NFC samples for the nRF54H20 SoC to reduce current consumption in idle mode.
  An empty netcore and additional configurations for power management were added to the sysbuild in the following samples:

  * :ref:`record_launch_app`
  * :ref:`record_text`
  * :ref:`nfc_shell`
  * :ref:`nfc_tnep_tag`
  * :ref:`writable_ndef_msg`

* :ref:`writable_ndef_msg` sample:

  * Fixed a power consumption issue.
    The main loop now blocks on a semaphore instead of using the :c:func:`k_cpu_atomic_idle` function, allowing the idle thread to handle power management after the read or write tag.

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Peripheral samples
------------------

* :ref:`radio_test` sample:

  * Added:

    * ``start_tx_sweep_with_sleep`` shell command.
        It allows for running a TX sweep with silent periods between each frequency.
    * ``start_tx_sweep_with_sleep_modulated`` shell command.
        It allows for running a modulated TX sweep with silent periods between each frequency.
    * ``set_channel_sequence`` shell command.
        It allows for setting a custom channel sequence for the ``start_tx_sweep_with_sleep`` command and ``start_tx_sweep_with_sleep_modulated`` commands..
    * ``print_channel_sequence`` shell command.
        It prints the currently configured channel sequence.
```

This is dependent on this backport PR getting merged: https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/28117, but that is the goal.

Author: Updated, please check.

PMIC samples
------------

* Added support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b/cpuapp`` board target to the :ref:`npm13xx_fuel_gauge` and the :ref:`npm13xx_one_button` samples.

Protocol serialization samples
------------------------------

* Added support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b`` board target variant in the following samples:

  * :ref:`nrf_rpc_protocols_serialization_client`
  * :ref:`nrf_rpc_protocols_serialization_server`

Thread samples
--------------

> * Added support for the nRF54L Series DKs in the following Thread sample documents:

Reviewer 4: samples perhaps?
```suggestion
* Added support for the nRF54L Series DKs in the following Thread samples:
```

  * :ref:`coap_client_sample`
  * :ref:`coap_server_sample`

* Removed all application-specific snippets from the Thread samples.
  Refer to the `migration guide <Migration guide for nRF Connect SDK v3.3.0_>`_ to see the list of changes.

Wi-Fi samples
-------------

* Added:

  * The :ref:`wifi_p2p_sample` sample that demonstrates how to establish a Wi-Fi Peer-to-Peer (P2P) connection using Wi-Fi Direct®, supporting both Client (CLI) mode and Group Owner (GO) mode operations.
  * Support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b/cpuapp`` board target variant to all Wi-Fi samples.

Other samples
-------------

> * Added support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b`` board target variant in the :ref:`coremark_sample` sample.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* :ref:`coremark_sample` sample:

  * Added support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b`` board target variant.
```

  * An issue where coexistence pin GPIO polarity settings were ignored when using the nRF700x coexistence interface.

Libraries for networking
------------------------

* The FTP client library has been moved to the Zephyr repository (see :ref:`zephyr:ftp_client_interface`).

* :ref:`lib_nrf_cloud` library:

  * Added:

    * The :c:func:`nrf_cloud_coap_shadow_network_info_update` function.
    * The :c:func:`nrf_cloud_coap_shadow_configured_info_update` function to update the configured sections in the device shadow over CoAP.
    * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_SEND_SHADOW_INFO_ON_CONNECT` Kconfig option to control whether the device shadow information is sent when the device connects to nRF Cloud.
    * Handling of the ``/shadow/update/delta/trim/err`` topic.
      Errors will be logged to the application if the delta shadow is larger than 1792 bytes.

  * Fixed an issue where CoAP FOTA was affected due to the downloader reading ``proxy_uri`` as a C string using ``strlen()`` to determine the CoAP option length.
    It picked up the stale tail, producing a corrupted download URL.

  * Removed:

>     * The ``NRF_CLOUD_MQTT_SHADOW_TRANSFORMS`` Kconfig option.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * The ``CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_MQTT_SHADOW_TRANSFORMS`` Kconfig option.
```

    * The ``/shadow/update/delta/full`` topic.
      It is replaced by ``/shadow/update/delta/trim``.
      Deltas are now trimmed by default to prioritize smaller shadows.

* :ref:`lib_nrf_cloud_pgps` library:

  * Updated the range for the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_PGPS_NUM_PREDICTIONS` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_PGPS_REPLACEMENT_THRESHOLD` Kconfig options to values supported by nRF Cloud.
  * Fixed an issue where preemptive updates were not always performed when expected.
  * Removed the ``CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_PGPS_PREDICTION_PERIOD`` Kconfig choice and related options (``CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_PGPS_PREDICTION_PERIOD_120_MIN`` and ``CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_PGPS_PREDICTION_PERIOD_240_MIN``).

Libraries for NFC
-----------------

* :ref:`lib_nfc_tnep` library:

  * Fixed the ``BUILD_ASSERT`` for the waiting time extension count (``_n_wait``) in the TNEP Tag API.
    It now uses ``NFC_TNEP_TAG_MAX_N_WAIT_TIME`` instead of ``NFC_TNEP_TAG_MAX_WAIT_TIME``, aligning the check with the TNEP 1.0 specification.
  * Removed the unused ``NFC_TNEP_NDEF_NLEN_SIZE`` define from the TNEP base API.

> 

Reviewer 8: After the PR https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/28172 mere add here the:
"  * Updated the NFC library to set the ``FRAMEDELAYMAX`` register to the default value when a field is lost.
    This avoids violating protocol timing, which can lead readers to reject the NFC tag's response."

Reviewer 8: The backport v3.3 is merged: https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/28193.
Please add this entry to the file.

Author: @MarGasiorek - The entry is added at the top level of NFC libraries. Could you confirm if this is the correct location or should the entry go under any specific NFC library?

Reviewer 8: Thank you @divipillai , this is correct location to place this entry.

* Updated:

  * The :ref:`Google Fast Pair integration <ug_bt_fast_pair_integration>` guide to reflect the Find My Device Network (FMDN) extension rename to Find Hub Network (FHN), aligning with the updated Google specification.
  * The :ref:`Google Fast Pair integration <ug_bt_fast_pair_integration>` guide to recommend devicetree (DTS) as the primary partition definition method and to deprecate the :ref:`partition_manager` approach.
    The only exception from these migration recommendations in the context of the Fast Pair sample support is the nRF53 Series DFU configuration with MCUboot in the overwrite mode (for example, the ``nrf5340dk/nrf5340/cpuapp`` board target in the :ref:`fast_pair_locator_tag` sample).
    This particular configuration is not yet deprecated, as the DTS alternative is not yet available.

Memfault integration
--------------------

* Added:

>   * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_POST_INITIAL_HEARTBEAT_ON_NETWORK_CONNECTED` Kconfig option to control whether an initial heartbeat is sent when the device connects to a network

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_POST_INITIAL_HEARTBEAT_ON_NETWORK_CONNECTED` Kconfig option to control whether an initial heartbeat is sent when the device connects to a network.
```

  * Support for recording location metrics when using external cloud location services (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_EXTERNAL`).

* Updated Memfault to version 1.37.1.
  See the `Memfault firmware SDK changelog`_ for details.

nRF Cloud integration
---------------------

* Updated by enabling a transform request for topic prefix and pairing during connection initialization to nRF Cloud in the MQTT finite state machine (FSM).
* Fixed a hang in the nRF Cloud log backend caused by incorrect error handling.
  When the semaphore cannot be acquired, the function now returns the original size instead of 0, allowing the logging system to proceed correctly.

MCUboot
=======

The MCUboot fork in |NCS| (``sdk-mcuboot``) contains all commits from the upstream MCUboot repository up to and including ``8d14eebfe0b7402ebdf77ce1b99ba1a3793670e9``, with some |NCS| specific additions.

The code for integrating MCUboot into |NCS| is located in the :file:`ncs/nrf/modules/mcuboot` folder.

The following list summarizes both the main changes inherited from upstream MCUboot and the main changes applied to the |NCS| specific additions:

> |no_changes_yet_note|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Added deinitialization for the QSPI flash driver in MCUboot.
* Fixed suspend-to-RAM (S2RAM) resume on the nRF54H20 SoC for direct-XIP mode.
* Added support for the nRF54LM20B SoC.
* Fixed UUID handling with external flash support.
* Added serial recovery support with the Zephyr USB device stack (USB next), especially on the nRF54LM20 DK and nRF54LM20 Dongle.
* Fixed decompression when the CC310 crypto accelerator is used.
* Reworked image UUID support to use Devicetree-based configuration.
* Made LZMA compression parameters configurable to reduce MCUboot size, enabling decompression on the ``nrf54ls05dk/nrf54ls05b/cpuapp`` board target.
* Updated ``imgtool.py`` so images can be ordered on demand in the manifest.
* Allowed cleanup of UARTE pins on nRF54L Series SoCs, including UARTE00 and UARTE136.
* Added support for a subset of functions in ``nrfxlib_crypto`` using the ocrypto software cryptography implementation (ECDSA P-256, SHA-256) for the ``nrf54ls05dk/nrf54ls05b/cpuapp`` board target.
```

Author: Updated all the entries. Please check.

Zephyr
======

.. NOTE TO MAINTAINERS: All the Zephyr commits in the below git commands must be handled specially after each upmerge and each nRF Connect SDK release.

The Zephyr fork in |NCS| (``sdk-zephyr``) contains all commits from the upstream Zephyr repository up to and including ``93b5f19f994b9a9376985299c1427a1630f6950e``, with some |NCS| specific additions.

For the list of upstream Zephyr commits (not including cherry-picked commits) incorporated into |NCS| since the most recent release, run the following command from the :file:`ncs/zephyr` repository (after running ``west update``):

.. code-block:: none

   git log --oneline 93b5f19f99 ^911b3da139

For the list of |NCS| specific commits, including commits cherry-picked from upstream, run:

.. code-block:: none

   git log --oneline manifest-rev ^93b5f19f99

The current |NCS| main branch is based on revision ``93b5f19f99`` of Zephyr.

.. note::
   For possible breaking changes and changes between the latest Zephyr release and the current Zephyr version, refer to the :ref:`Zephyr release notes <zephyr_release_notes>`.

Documentation
=============

* Added:

>   * Multiple references to the note explaining the current status of the Partition Manager deprecation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * Notes in relevant areas explaining the current status of the Partition Manager deprecation.
```

  * The :ref:`API documentation section for the cryptographic drivers <crypto_drivers_api_documentation>` with links to the added API documentation for the CRACEN driver.
  * The Oberon PSA Crypto to version 1.5.4 that introduces support for the following new features with the Oberon PSA driver:

    * Support for PSA Certified Crypto API v1.4, PSA Crypto API v1.4 PQC Extension and PSA Crypto Driver Interface v1.0 alpha 1.
    * Experimental support for Extendable-Output Function (XOF) algorithms SHAKE128, SHAKE256, ASCON XOF128 and ASCON CXOF128.
    * Experimental support for hash ML-DSA and deterministic ML-DSA asymmetric signature algorithms.
    * Experimental support for ASCON HASH256 hash algorithm.
    * Experimental support for ASCON AEAD128 AEAD algorithm.
    * Updated implementations of WPA3-SAE, ML-DSA and ML-KEM to support the PSA Crypto API v1.4.

    The :ref:`ug_crypto_supported_features` page has been updated accordingly.

  * The :ref:`ug_crypto_supported_features` page with information about support for the Curve448 (X448) elliptic curve under :ref:`ug_crypto_supported_features_signature_algorithms` and :ref:`ug_crypto_supported_features_ecc_curve_types`.

>   * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_RSA_KEY_SIZE_2048` Kconfig option is now enabled by default whenever :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_RSA_KEY_PAIR_BASIC` or :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_RSA_PUBLIC_KEY` is enabled and no other RSA key size is enabled.

Author: @tomi-font - Could you confirm whether `CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_RSA_KEY_PAIR_BASIC` is the correct Kconfig option as it doesn't link to the Kconfig reference page - https://ncsbmdoc.z6.web.core.windows.net/ncs/PR-27915/kconfig/index.html#CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_RSA_KEY_PAIR_BASIC.

Reviewer 9: It's indeed correct. It comes from Zephyr's `modules/mbedtls/Kconfig.psa.logic`. Don't know why it's not rendered in the documentation.

Author: The Zephyr Koconfig options don't render in the Kconfig reference page. I will change the format for the Kconfig option as it doesn't link now.

Known issues
************

Known issues are only tracked for the latest official release.
See `known issues for nRF Connect SDK v3.3.0`_ for the list of issues valid for the latest release.

.. _ncs_release_notes_330_changelog:

Changelog
*********

The following sections provide detailed lists of changes by component.

IDE, OS, and tool support
=========================

* Updated the required `SEGGER J-Link`_ version to v9.24a.

Bootloaders and DFU
===================

* Added:

  * A new lifecycle state (LCS) API designed for nRF54L Series devices.
  * Support for MCUboot firmware loader updates using the :ref:`installer` application in the Single Slot DFU scheme.
  * Implementation of USB firmware loader :ref:`fw_loader_usb_mcumgr`.
    You can select it for a sysbuild project by enabling the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_FIRMWARE_LOADER_IMAGE_USB_MCUMGR` Kconfig option.
  * Experimental support for the nRF54LS05B SoC.
  * Full support for the MCUboot RAM load mode.

* Updated:

  * The :ref:`mcuboot_with_decompression` sample by moving the sample to :file:`samples/dfu/compressed_update` and updated the sample name from "nRF Compression: MCUboot compressed update".

>   * Renamed the existing lifecycle state (LCS) type ``lcs`` to :c:enum:`bl_storage_lcs`.

Reviewer 10: * The `smp_svr` sample by enabling UUID checks on nRF54L and nRF54H platforms.
* The class ID value of the merged slot binaries from `nRF54H20_sample_app` to `nRF54H20_sample_merged_slot_0` or `nRF54H20_sample_merged_slot_1` in the `smp_svr` sample for nRF54H20.
* The `mcuboot_with_decompression` sample by disabling the partition manager and providing a new DTS-based memory map. The resulting memory maps are not compatible with each other.

Reviewer 2: @tomchy Is fullfiled?

Author: yeah, these are sample-related entries. I have added to the respective sample section under DFU samples. Please check.
The first point was already mentioned. Edited it to add nRF54H platforms as well.

  * Replaced the ``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_GENERATE_DEFAULT_KMU_KEYFILE`` Kconfig option with :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_GENERATE_DEFAULT_KEY_FILE`.
    This change allows generating a default key file for MCUboot when using either the KMU or ITS for key storage.

    Affected samples:

    * :ref:`nrf_desktop`
    * :ref:`fast_pair_locator_tag`
    * :ref:`mcuboot_with_encryption`
    * :ref:`single_slot_sample`
    * :ref:`nrf_smp_svr_sample`
    * :ref:`mcuboot_minimal_configuration`

  * Replaced ``ExternalNcsVariantProject_Add(..)`` CMake function with the ``ExternalZephyrVariantProject_Add(..)`` function.
    The new function is defined and maintained in the Zephyr repository, providing a very similar API and functionality.
    The old function is deprecated and kept for backward compatibility, but it will be removed in the future.

  * Moved the UUID configuration for the MCUboot images from the Kconfig options to the devicetree.
    The UUIDs are now defined in the devicetree overlay files for each image.
    For more information, see the :ref:`mcuboot_config`.

>   * Enabled the glitch detector when |NSIB| is running on the nRF54L15 SoC.

Reviewer 2: newes update
```suggestion
  * Enabled the glitch detector when |NSIB| is running on the nRF54L15, nRF54L10 and nRF54L05 SoCc.
```

DECT NR+ samples
----------------

* Added:

  * The :ref:`hello_dect` sample for demonstrating the use of the DECT NR+ stack with connection manager and IPv6 connectivity.
  * The :ref:`dect_shell_application` sample with the utilities for testing the DECT NR+ networking stack and modem features.

* :ref:`dect_phy_shell_application` sample:

  * Updated:

    * The ``dect rf_tool`` command - Major updates to improve usage for RX and TX testing.
    * Scheduler - Dynamic flow control based on load tier to prevent modem out-of-memory errors.
    * Settings - Continuous Wave (CW) support and possibility to disable Synchronization Training Field (STF) on TX and RX.

DFU samples
-----------

* Added:

  * The :ref:`fw_loader_usb_mcumgr` sample, which provides a minimal configuration for firmware loading using SMP over the USB CDC ACM virtual serial port.
    The sample serves as a starting point for developing custom firmware loader applications that work with the MCUboot bootloader.
    To enable this firmware loader implementation, use the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_FIRMWARE_LOADER_IMAGE_USB_MCUMGR` Kconfig option.

>   * Support for using the :ref:`fw_loader_usb_mcumgr` sample with the :ref:`single_slot_sample`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

remove point here - it is duplicated a few lines bellow

    You can test this configuration on the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` board.
  * Support for the ``nrf54ls05dk/nrf54ls05b/cpuapp`` board target in the following samples:

    * :ref:`nrf_compression_mcuboot_compressed_update`
    * :ref:`single_slot_sample`
    * :ref:`nrf_smp_svr_sample`
    * :ref:`mcuboot_minimal_configuration`

* :ref:`mcuboot_minimal_configuration` sample:

  * Added size-optimized configuration for the ``nrf54ls05dk/nrf54ls05b/cpuapp`` board target with EC P256 signature support.

* :ref:`single_slot_sample` sample:

>   * Added support for entering the firmware loader mode using the applications's USB CDC ACM virtual serial port and the SMP MCUmgr reset command with boot-mode selection for the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` board.

Reviewer 2: can we mention here that this is a buttonless DFU enter mechanism?

  * Support for recording location metrics when using external cloud location services (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCATION_SERVICE_EXTERNAL`).

* Updated Memfault to version 1.37.1.
  See the `Memfault firmware SDK changelog`_ for details.

nRF Cloud integration
---------------------

* Updated by enabling a transform request for topic prefix and pairing during connection initialization to nRF Cloud in the MQTT finite state machine (FSM).
* Fixed a hang in the nRF Cloud log backend caused by incorrect error handling.
  When the semaphore cannot be acquired, the function now returns the original size instead of 0, allowing the logging system to proceed correctly.

MCUboot
=======

The MCUboot fork in |NCS| (``sdk-mcuboot``) contains all commits from the upstream MCUboot repository up to and including ``8d14eebfe0b7402ebdf77ce1b99ba1a3793670e9``, with some |NCS| specific additions.

The code for integrating MCUboot into |NCS| is located in the :file:`ncs/nrf/modules/mcuboot` folder.

The following list summarizes both the main changes inherited from upstream MCUboot and the main changes applied to the |NCS| specific additions:

* Added:

>   * Deinitialization for the QSPI flash driver in MCUboot.

Reviewer 2: my mistake - I should have mention sQSPI
```suggestion
  * Deinitialization for the sQSPI flash driver in MCUboot.
```

For the list of upstream Zephyr commits (not including cherry-picked commits) incorporated into |NCS| since the most recent release, run the following command from the :file:`ncs/zephyr` repository (after running ``west update``):

.. code-block:: none

   git log --oneline 93b5f19f99 ^911b3da139

For the list of |NCS| specific commits, including commits cherry-picked from upstream, run:

.. code-block:: none

   git log --oneline manifest-rev ^93b5f19f99

The current |NCS| main branch is based on revision ``93b5f19f99`` of Zephyr.

.. note::
   For possible breaking changes and changes between the latest Zephyr release and the current Zephyr version, refer to the :ref:`Zephyr release notes <zephyr_release_notes>`.

Documentation
=============

* Added:

  * Notes in relevant areas explaining the current status of the Partition Manager deprecation.
  * A section in :ref:`ug_nrf54h20_pm_optimization` about optimizing power on the nRF54H20 SoC by relocating the radio core firmware to TCM.
  * A section in the :ref:`lib_tfm_ioctl_api` page about using the TF-M IOCTL API to perform secure memory writes from NSPE.

> * Updated the :ref:`emds_readme` library documentation to use static device tree partitions instead of the Partition Manager.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
* Updated the :ref:`emds_readme` library documentation to use static devicetree partitions instead of the Partition Manager.
```

> * Removed references to JITP in different areas of the documentation.

Reviewer 2: You can add a sentence on
DFU samples concentrates under common pages of DFU samples. ref.:https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/27890/

  * Replaced the ``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_GENERATE_DEFAULT_KMU_KEYFILE`` Kconfig option with :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_GENERATE_DEFAULT_KEY_FILE`.
    This change allows generating a default key file for MCUboot when using either the KMU or ITS for key storage.

    Affected samples:

    * :ref:`nrf_desktop`
    * :ref:`fast_pair_locator_tag`
    * :ref:`mcuboot_with_encryption`
    * :ref:`single_slot_sample`
    * :ref:`nrf_smp_svr_sample`
    * :ref:`mcuboot_minimal_configuration`

  * Replaced ``ExternalNcsVariantProject_Add(..)`` CMake function with the ``ExternalZephyrVariantProject_Add(..)`` function.
    The new function is defined and maintained in the Zephyr repository, providing a very similar API and functionality.
    The old function is deprecated and kept for backward compatibility, but it will be removed in the future.

  * Moved the UUID configuration for the MCUboot images from the Kconfig options to the devicetree.
    The UUIDs are now defined in the devicetree overlay files for each image.
    For more information, see the :ref:`mcuboot_config`.

  * Enabled the glitch detector when |NSIB| is running on the nRF54L15, nRF54L10, and nRF54L05 SoCs.

>   * DFU on nRF54LM20A and nRF54LM20b SoCs is fully supported.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
  * DFU on nRF54LM20A and nRF54LM20B SoCs is fully supported.
```

  * Support for AES-GCM AEAD using CRACEN for the :ref:`nrf54lm20dk <app_boards>` board.
  * Support for ChaCha20-Poly1305 AEAD using CRACEN for the :ref:`nrf54lm20dk <app_boards>` board.
  * Support for AES Key Wrap (AES-KW) and AES Key Wrap with Padding (AES-KWP) algorithms in the :ref:`nrf_oberon <crypto_drivers_oberon>` and :ref:`CRACEN <crypto_drivers_cracen>` drivers.
    The :ref:`Supported cryptographic operations in the nRF Connect SDK <ug_crypto_supported_features_key_wrap_algorithms>` page has been updated accordingly.
  * Doxygen API group hierarchy files for the CRACEN driver: :file:`cracen_api_structure.h` (top-level), :file:`cracen_sw/include/cracen_sw_api_structure.h` (software implementations), and :file:`common/include/cracen_common_api_structure.h` (common utilities).
    The :ref:`API documentation section for the cryptographic drivers <crypto_drivers_api_documentation>` has been updated accordingly.
  * Support for storing AES Key Wrap (AES-KW) keys in the KMU.

* Updated:

  * The :ref:`ug_kmu_provisioning_production_metadata` section to reflect bit-field size changes in the :c:struct:`kmu_metadata` structure.

>   * The :ref:`API documentation section for the cryptographic drivers <crypto_drivers_api_documentation>` with links to the added API documentation for the CRACEN driver.

Reviewer 4: Isn't this mentioned above: https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/27915/changes#diff-771199c7d54a681a1268e66c5a1c73d6a005151b9afe077af4846f8eacf9c082R174

  * The Oberon PSA Crypto to version 1.5.4 that introduces support for the following new features with the Oberon PSA driver:

    * Support for PSA Certified Crypto API v1.4, PSA Crypto API v1.4 PQC Extension and PSA Crypto Driver Interface v1.0 alpha 1.
    * Experimental support for Extendable-Output Function (XOF) algorithms SHAKE128, SHAKE256, ASCON XOF128 and ASCON CXOF128.
    * Experimental support for hash ML-DSA and deterministic ML-DSA asymmetric signature algorithms.
    * Experimental support for ASCON HASH256 hash algorithm.
    * Experimental support for ASCON AEAD128 AEAD algorithm.

>     * Implementations of WPA3-SAE, ML-DSA and ML-KEM to support the PSA Crypto API v1.4.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
    * Implementations of WPA3-SAE, ML-DSA, and ML-KEM to support the PSA Crypto API v1.4.
```

    The :ref:`ug_crypto_supported_features` page has been updated accordingly.

  * The :ref:`ug_crypto_supported_features` page with information about support for the Curve448 (X448) elliptic curve under :ref:`ug_crypto_supported_features_signature_algorithms` and :ref:`ug_crypto_supported_features_ecc_curve_types`.
  * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_RSA_KEY_SIZE_2048` Kconfig option is now enabled by default whenever ``CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_RSA_KEY_PAIR_BASIC`` or :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_RSA_PUBLIC_KEY` is enabled and no other RSA key size is enabled.
  * The :ref:`app_approtect` page with more detailed information about the AP-Protect implementation types and how to configure them for each device.

>   * The :ref:`API documentation section for the cryptographic drivers <crypto_drivers_api_documentation>` with links to the added API documentation for the CRACEN driver.

Reviewer 11: This could be removed from here since it is mentioned earlier in line 181.

* Updated:

  * To version 2.2.2.
  * The default TF-M profile is now :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TFM_PROFILE_TYPE_NOT_SET` for all configurations except for Thingy:91 and Thingy:91 X, on which it is still :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TFM_PROFILE_TYPE_MINIMAL`.
  * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TFM_PROFILE_TYPE_MINIMAL` Kconfig option now supports enabling PSA crypto hash functions.
  * Reading UICR.OTP using the ``tfm_platform_mem_read()`` function is now allowed on the nRF54L Series devices.

Protocols
=========

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`protocol <protocols>`.
See `Samples`_ for lists of changes for the protocol-related samples.

Bluetooth® LE
-------------

* Updated the Direct Test Mode HCI commands by making them optional through the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_CTLR_DTM_HCI` Kconfig option.

DECT NR+
--------

* Added DECT NR+ full stack support, including the following features:

  * Connection Manager integration for enabling easy connect for the applications.
  * Network management API for controlling DECT NR+ operations.
  * L2 API implementation enabling IPv6 connectivity, including HAL definition.

>   * Enabling Internet connectivity through sink and BR (Border Router) support together with, for example, Serial Modem on a gateway nRF91 LTE device.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
  * Enabling Internet connectivity through sink and Border Router (BR) support together with, for example, Serial Modem on a gateway nRF91 LTE device.
```

DFU samples
-----------

* Added:

  * The :ref:`fw_loader_usb_mcumgr` sample, which provides a minimal configuration for firmware loading using SMP over the USB CDC ACM virtual serial port.
    The sample serves as a starting point for developing custom firmware loader applications that work with the MCUboot bootloader.
    To enable this firmware loader implementation, use the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_FIRMWARE_LOADER_IMAGE_USB_MCUMGR` Kconfig option.
  * Support for the ``nrf54ls05dk/nrf54ls05b/cpuapp`` board target in the following samples:

    * :ref:`nrf_compression_mcuboot_compressed_update`
    * :ref:`single_slot_sample`
    * :ref:`nrf_smp_svr_sample`
    * :ref:`mcuboot_minimal_configuration`

* :ref:`mcuboot_minimal_configuration` sample:

  * Added size-optimized configuration for the ``nrf54ls05dk/nrf54ls05b/cpuapp`` board target with EC P256 signature support.

* :ref:`mcuboot_with_decompression` sample:

  * Updated:

    * The sample by moving to :file:`samples/dfu/compressed_update` and updated the sample name from "nRF Compression: MCUboot compressed update".

>     * By disabling the partition manager and providing a new DTS-based memory map.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
    * By disabling the Partition Manager and providing a new DTS-based memory map.
```

      The resulting memory maps are not compatible with each other.

* :ref:`single_slot_sample` sample:

>   * Added support for entering the firmware loader mode using the applications's USB CDC ACM virtual serial port and the SMP MCUmgr reset command with boot-mode selection for the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` board.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
  * Added support for entering the firmware loader mode using the application's USB CDC ACM virtual serial port and the SMP MCUmgr reset command with boot-mode selection for the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` board.
```

>   * Added support for entering the firmware loader mode using the applications's USB CDC ACM virtual serial port and the SMP MCUmgr reset command with boot-mode selection for the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` board.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * Added support for entering the firmware loader mode using the application's USB CDC ACM virtual serial port and the SMP MCUmgr reset command with boot-mode selection for the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` board.
```

>   * Added support for entering the firmware loader mode using the applications's USB CDC ACM virtual serial port and the SMP MCUmgr reset command with boot-mode selection for the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` board.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * Added support for entering the firmware loader mode using the application's USB CDC ACM virtual serial port and the SMP MCUmgr reset command with boot-mode selection for the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` board.
```

    This is a buttonless DFU enter mechanism.
  * Updated the sample configuration for demonstrating DFU on the :zephyr:board:`nrf54lm20dk` board target using the :ref:`fw_loader_ble_mcumgr` firmware loader.

* :ref:`nrf_smp_svr_sample` sample:

  * Added UUID configuration for nRF54L and nRF54H Series devices.
  * Updated:

    * By moving the sample to the :file:`samples/dfu/smp_svr` folder.
    * The class ID value of the merged slot binaries from ``nRF54H20_sample_app`` to ``nRF54H20_sample_merged_slot_0`` or ``nRF54H20_sample_merged_slot_1`` for nRF54H20.

* :ref:`firmware_loader_entrance` sample:

  * Added the :ref:`sample documentation page <firmware_loader_entrance>`.

* :ref:`mcuboot_with_encryption` sample:

>   * Added support for the :zephyr:board:`nrf54h20dk` board target along with autogenarted ITS signature key.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * Added support for the :zephyr:board:`nrf54h20dk` board target along with autogenerated ITS signature key.
```

* :ref:`writable_ndef_msg` sample:

  * Fixed a power consumption issue.
    The main loop now blocks on a semaphore instead of using the :c:func:`k_cpu_atomic_idle` function, allowing the idle thread to handle power management after the read or write tag.

Peripheral samples
------------------

* :ref:`radio_test` sample:

  * Added:

    * The ``start_tx_sweep_with_sleep`` shell command.
      It allows for running a TX sweep with silent periods between each frequency.
    * The ``start_tx_sweep_with_sleep_modulated`` shell command.
      It allows for running a modulated TX sweep with silent periods between each frequency.
    * The ``set_channel_sequence`` shell command.
      It allows for setting a custom channel sequence for the ``start_tx_sweep_with_sleep`` command and ``start_tx_sweep_with_sleep_modulated`` commands.
    * The ``print_channel_sequence`` shell command.
      It prints the currently configured channel sequence.

PMIC samples
------------

* Added support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b/cpuapp`` board target to the :ref:`npm13xx_fuel_gauge` and the :ref:`npm13xx_one_button` samples.

Protocol serialization samples
------------------------------

> * Added support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b`` board target variant in the following samples:

Reviewer 11: Should this be **board target** instead of **board target variant**?

  * :ref:`nrf_rpc_protocols_serialization_client`
  * :ref:`nrf_rpc_protocols_serialization_server`

Thread samples
--------------

> * Added support for the nRF54L Series DKs in the following Thread sample:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Added support for the nRF54L Series DKs in the following Thread samples:
```

  * :ref:`coap_client_sample`
  * :ref:`coap_server_sample`

* Removed all application-specific snippets from the Thread samples.
  Refer to the `migration guide <Migration guide for nRF Connect SDK v3.3.0_>`_ to see the list of changes.

Wi-Fi samples
-------------

* Added:

  * The :ref:`wifi_p2p_sample` sample that demonstrates how to establish a Wi-Fi Peer-to-Peer (P2P) connection using Wi-Fi Direct®, supporting both Client (CLI) mode and Group Owner (GO) mode operations.
  * Support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b/cpuapp`` board target variant to all Wi-Fi samples.

Other samples
-------------

* :ref:`coremark_sample` sample:

>   * Added support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b`` board target variant.

Reviewer 11: Same as above.

Drivers
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`driver <drivers>`.

* Added the :ref:`uart_driver` documentation.
* Updated the ``nrfx_gppi`` API to now have full support on the application core of the nRF54H20 device.
  Using DPPI does not require the devicetree configuration.

Wi-Fi drivers
-------------

* Added functionality to optionally insert Wi-Fi idle windows of configurable time (ms) using :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF70_BT_SLOT_TIME` after each channel scan.
  This depends on :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF70_SR_COEX`.

> * Updated the Wi-Fi coexistence functionality to disabled by default.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
* Updated the Wi-Fi coexistence functionality to be disabled by default.
```

  * An issue where coexistence pin GPIO polarity settings were ignored when using the nRF700x coexistence interface.

Libraries for networking
------------------------

* The FTP client library has been moved to the Zephyr repository (see :ref:`zephyr:ftp_client_interface`).

* :ref:`lib_nrf_cloud` library:

  * Added:

    * The :c:func:`nrf_cloud_coap_shadow_network_info_update` function.
    * The :c:func:`nrf_cloud_coap_shadow_configured_info_update` function to update the configured sections in the device shadow over CoAP.
    * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_SEND_SHADOW_INFO_ON_CONNECT` Kconfig option to control whether the device shadow information is sent when the device connects to nRF Cloud.
    * Handling of the ``/shadow/update/delta/trim/err`` topic.
      Errors will be logged to the application if the delta shadow is larger than 1792 bytes.

  * Fixed an issue where CoAP FOTA was affected due to the downloader reading ``proxy_uri`` as a C string using ``strlen()`` to determine the CoAP option length.
    It picked up the stale tail, producing a corrupted download URL.

  * Removed:

    * The ``CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_MQTT_SHADOW_TRANSFORMS`` Kconfig option.

>       Transform request are the default method to request AWS shadows, replacing the shadow type ``Accepted``.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      Transform request is the default method to request AWS shadows, replacing the shadow type ``Accepted``.
```

.. _ncs_release_notes_330:

|NCS| v3.3.0 Release Notes
##########################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

|NCS| delivers reference software and supporting libraries for developing low-power wireless applications with Nordic Semiconductor products in the nRF52, nRF53, nRF54, nRF70, and nRF91 Series.

> The SDK includes open source projects (TF-M, MCUboot, OpenThread, Matter, and the Zephyr RTOS), which are continuously integrated and redistributed with the SDK.

Reviewer 6: which or that?

Author: I believe, which. Because, it is an additional information. If you removed the clause entirely, the main sentence would still be complete.

Release notes might refer to "experimental" support for features, which indicates that the feature is incomplete in functionality or verification, and can be expected to change in future releases.
To learn more, see :ref:`software_maturity`.

Highlights
**********

Added the following features as supported:

* Matter:

  * Matter over Thread support for nRF54LM20A and nRF54LM20B SoCs.

>   * Matter over Wi-Fi support for nRF54LM20A combined with the nRF7002-EB II shield.

Reviewer 12: Could you please add here:
```
* Released the `Matter Cluster Editor app` v1.0.1 and `Matter Quick Start app` v1.1.0.
```
all link references in the `` come from the `link.txt` file.

* Bluetooth®:

  * Quality of Service (QoS) channel survey feature is now supported for production.
    This feature allows devices to analyze the RF channels and avoid the ones that are more congested, helping to improve the connection quality.

* Wi-Fi®:

  * Support for WPA3-SAE using PSA APIs.

>   * Support for Wi-Fi Direct operation mode on the nRF7002 DK, with support for Wi-Fi Direct added to the :ref:`wifi_wfa_qt_app_sample` sample.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
  * Support for Wi-Fi Direct® operation mode on the nRF7002 DK, with support for Wi-Fi Direct added to the :ref:`wifi_wfa_qt_app_sample` sample.
```

* nRF54L Series:

  * Support for the nRF54LM20B SoC.

* DECT NR+:

  * Modem firmware v2.0.0 supports star topology network, implementing subset of MAC and DLC layers for easier networking using NR+.

Added the following features as experimental:

* Bluetooth:

  * Direct Test Mode.

>     This mode allows you to test the radio low level interface for RF certification, debugging and troubleshooting.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
    This mode allows you to test the radio low level interface for RF certification, debugging, and troubleshooting.
```

  * LE Flushable ACL Data feature, and the LE Read and Write Automatic Flush Timeout HCI commands.
    These allow devices to drop packages from the transmit queue if the timeout expires before they are sent.

* Wi-Fi:

  * Support for the nRF54LM20B SoC combined with the nRF7002-EB II shield.

* nRF54L Series:

  * Support for the new nRF54LS05A and nRF54LS05B SoCs.

* nRFCloud:

  * CoAP client for uploading diagnostic data over LTE-M/NB-IoT.

>   * Battery metrics  for nPM1300 or nPM1304 PMICs, including fuel gauge integration and battery voltage heartbeat metric.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
  * Battery metrics for nPM1300 or nPM1304 PMICs, including fuel gauge integration and battery voltage heartbeat metric.
```

Improved:

* Bluetooth:

  * Introduced separate libraries for nRF54LM and nRF54LV sub-series.

* Wi-Fi:

  * Updated Zperf to enable Raw TX throughput testing and throughput improvements.

Deprecated:

* The Partition Manager is a component in the |NCS| that handles the flash memory partitioning at build time.
  This functionality is now replaced by Zephyr's default devicetree-based flash partitioning when multi-image builds are involved.
  It is recommended that all new designs with Nordic devices are built with DTS instead of Partition Manager.
  Partition Manager will be removed from |NCS| in the Q3 release from the main branch.

>   As the first step, in the |NCS| 3.3.0, DTS is supported in MCUboot and TFM.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  As the first step, in the |NCS| 3.3.0, DTS is supported in MCUboot and TF-M.
```

>   Samples will be adapted to showcase the newer way of allocating partitions within the v3.3.0 branch.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  Samples will be adapted to showcase the new way of allocating partitions within the v3.3.0 branch.
```

Migration notes
***************

See the `Migration guide for nRF Connect SDK v3.3.0`_ for the changes required or recommended when migrating your application from |NCS| v3.2.0 to |NCS| v3.3.0.

Known issues
************

Known issues are only tracked for the latest official release.
See `known issues for nRF Connect SDK v3.3.0`_ for the list of issues valid for the latest release.

.. _ncs_release_notes_330_changelog:

Changelog
*********

The following sections provide detailed lists of changes by component.

IDE, OS, and tool support
=========================

* Updated the required `SEGGER J-Link`_ version to v9.24a.

Bootloaders and DFU
===================

* Added:

  * A new lifecycle state (LCS) API designed for nRF54L Series devices.
  * Support for MCUboot firmware loader updates using the :ref:`installer` application in the Single Slot DFU scheme.
  * Implementation of USB firmware loader :ref:`fw_loader_usb_mcumgr`.
    You can select it for a sysbuild project by enabling the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_FIRMWARE_LOADER_IMAGE_USB_MCUMGR` Kconfig option.
  * Experimental support for the nRF54LS05B SoC.
  * Full support for the MCUboot RAM load mode.

* Updated:

>   * Renamed the existing lifecycle state (LCS) type ``lcs`` to :c:enum:`bl_storage_lcs`.

Reviewer 6: Consider the verb formats to align with Updated, such as
* By renaming
* By replacing
* By moving
* By enabling...

    * The :ref:`ug_crypto_supported_features` page with the :ref:`ug_crypto_supported_features_countermeasures` section with information about support for the countermeasures in the CRACEN driver.
    * The :ref:`ug_kmu_guides_cracen_overview` page with the section about :ref:`ug_kmu_cracen_countermeasures`.

* Removed:

  * The ``CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_WPA3_SAE_PT`` Kconfig option and replaced it with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_WPA3_SAE`.
  * The ``CONFIG_PSA_WANT_ALG_WPA3_SAE`` Kconfig option and replaced it with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_ALG_WPA3_SAE_FIXED` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_ALG_WPA3_SAE_GDH`.
  * The ``CONFIG_MBEDTLS_PSA_STATIC_KEY_SLOT_BUFFER_SIZE`` Kconfig option.
    The PSA Crypto API is able to infer the key slot buffer size based on the keys enabled in the build, so there is no need to define it manually.
  * The ``CONFIG_MBEDTLS_MAC_SHA256_ENABLED`` Kconfig option.

Mbed TLS
--------

* Updated to version 3.6.6.

Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M)
-------------------------

* Added support for the PSA Key Wrapping functions from the PSA Certified Crypto API v1.4.0.

* Updated:

>   * To version 2.2.2.

Reviewer 6: Align the items also to read better with Updated.

Enhanced ShockBurst (ESB)
-------------------------

* Added:

  * Experimental support for concurrent operation of ESB with other radio protocols using the :ref:`mpsl_timeslot` feature.
  * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_ESB_CLOCK_INIT` Kconfig option.
    When this option is enabled, the :c:func:`esb_init` function automatically starts the required high-frequency clock and applies platform-specific errata workarounds.
    Applications that manage clocks independently can leave this option disabled (default).

* Fixed invalid radio configuration for legacy ESB protocol.

Matter
------

* Added support for nRF54LM20B SoC in Matter samples and applications.
* Updated:

  * The :ref:`matter_test_event_triggers_default_test_event_triggers` section with the new Closure Control cluster test event triggers.
  * Decreased Matter OTA image transfer time by around 15%.
  * By enabling PSA Crypto support by default, even when Wi-Fi is enabled.
  * The :ref:`ug_matter_platform_and_dmp` page with the certification ID granted for Nordic Matter Compliant Platform working with the Matter 1.5.0 version.

>   * The `Matter over Thread power consumption and battery measurements <nWP049 - Matter over Thread: Power consumption and battery life_>`_ and `Online Power Profiler for Matter over Thread`_ to include data for the nRF54LM20A and nRF54LM20B SoC.

Reviewer 12: ```
  * The `Matter Quick Start app` to version v1.1.0 with nRF54LM20 DK (Matter Light Bulb, Matter Lock, Matter Temperature Sensor, and Matter Contact Sensor), and nRF54L15 TAG (Matter Weather Station, and Matter Temperature Sensor) support.
  * The `Matter Cluster Editor app` to version v1.0.1 providing fixes for some issues.
```

    The ``nrf_wifi_gen_raw_tx.py`` script builds a ``zperf raw upload`` shell line and an 802.11 QoS Data template for aggregation-friendly MPDUs.
    The ``nrf_wifi_zperf_raw_tx.py`` script aggregates **tshark** throughput from a live interface or a PCAP file, reporting rates in Mbps consistent with iperf2 style output.
  * A :ref:`Performance profiling <ug_nrf70_raw_tx_performance_profiling>` subsection under :ref:`ug_nrf70_developing_raw_ieee_80211_packet_transmission`.

* Updated:

  * By enabling PSA Crypto support by default for personal security modes.
  * WPA3-SAE support status from experimental to supported and is now enabled by default.

Applications
============

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`application <applications>`.

High-Performance Framework (HPF)
--------------------------------

* Added support for the nRF54LV10A SoC in HPF GPIO.

Matter bridge
-------------

* Added support for the nRF54LM20B SoC.
* Updated partitions mapping for the nRF7002 DK in the application.
  See the `migration guide <Migration guide for nRF Connect SDK v3.3.0_>`_ for more information.
* Removed the ``onoff_plug`` snippet from the application.

>   To build the application with the ``onoff_plug`` functionality, use the :file:`overlay-onoff_plug.conf` configuration overlay file.

Reviewer 12: Could you please add below the following section:

```
Matter Weather Station
----------------------

* Added support for the nRF54L15 TAG.
```

* Added:

  * Dynamic configuration of the number of channels for the encoder based on the configured audio locations.
    The number of channels is set during runtime using the :c:func:`audio_system_encoder_num_ch_set` function.
    This allows configuring mono or stereo encoding depending on the configured audio locations, potentially saving CPU and memory resources.
  * High CPU load callback using the Zephyr CPU load subsystem.
    The callback uses a :c:func:`printk` function, as the logging subsystem is scheduled out if higher priority threads take all CPU time.
    This makes debugging high CPU load situations easier in the application.
    The threshold for high CPU load is set in :file:`peripherals.c` using the ``CPU_LOAD_HIGH_THRESHOLD_PERCENT`` macro.
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SPEED_OPTIMIZATIONS` to enable compiler speed optimizations for the application.
  * Support for multiple independent coordinated sets in :ref:`unicast client app<nrf53_audio_unicast_client_app>`.
    When all the devices in a coordinated set are disconnected, the SIRK is cleared, allowing a new unicast group to be formed with a new SIRK without the need to restart the application.

>   * Added SIRK generation based on the username when using the :file:`buildprog.py` Python script for the nRF5340 Audio unicast client sample.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  * SIRK generation based on the username when using the :file:`buildprog.py` Python script for the nRF5340 Audio unicast client sample.
```

    These files are included by the DTS overlay files of the application.
    The old Partition Manager configurations are still supported.
    See the :ref:`nrf_desktop_memory_layout` page for more details.

* Removed the application-specific Kconfig option (``CONFIG_DESKTOP_RTT``) that enabled RTT for nRF Desktop logging (:option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_LOG`) or nRF Desktop shell (:option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_SHELL`).
  nRF Desktop shell automatically enables RTT by default (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USE_SEGGER_RTT`).
  You can use the newly introduced application-specific Kconfig option :option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_LOG_RTT` for nRF Desktop RTT logging configuration.
  By default, this option makes the RTT log backend block the message until it is transferred to host (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOG_BACKEND_RTT_MODE_BLOCK`) instead of dropping messages that do not fit in up-buffer (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOG_BACKEND_RTT_MODE_DROP`).
  This is done to prevent dropping the newest logs.

nRF Machine Learning (Edge Impulse)
-----------------------------------

* Deprecated the :ref:`nrf_machine_learning_app` application.

>   Replaced by the Gesture Recognition application in `Edge AI Add-on for nRF Connect SDK`_.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  It is replaced by the Gesture Recognition application in `Edge AI Add-on for nRF Connect SDK`_.
```

* Updated:

  * The documentation for all Matter samples and applications to make it more consistent and easier to maintain and read.
  * Partitions mapping for the nRF7002 DK in all Matter samples.
    See the `migration guide <Migration guide for nRF Connect SDK v3.3.0_>`_ for more information.

* :ref:`matter_light_switch_sample` sample:

  * Removed the ``lit_icd`` snippet from the sample and enabled LIT ICD configuration by default.

* :ref:`matter_manufacturer_specific_sample` sample:

  * Added support for the ``NRF_MATTER_CLUSTER_INIT`` macro.

* :ref:`matter_closure_sample` sample:

  * Added support for the Closure Control cluster test event triggers.

* :ref:`matter_lock_sample` sample:

  * Added:

    * Support for the :ref:`matter_lock_sample_wifi_thread_switching` in the nRF54LM20 DK with the nRF7002-EB II shield attached.
    * Lock data storage implementation based on the ARM PSA Protected Storage API, enabled with the :option:`CONFIG_LOCK_ACCESS_STORAGE_PROTECTED_STORAGE` Kconfig option.

* :ref:`matter_light_bulb_sample` sample:

  * Added support for :ref:`matter_light_bulb_aws_iot_integration` in the nRF54LM20 DK with the nRF7002-EB II shield attached.

> 

Reviewer 12: Could you please add here:

```
* :ref:`matter_template_sample` sample:

  * Added support for nRF54L15 TAG.

* :ref:`matter_temperature_sensor_sample` sample:

  * Added support for nRF54L15 TAG.

.. _ncs_release_notes_330:

|NCS| v3.3.0 Release Notes
##########################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

|NCS| delivers reference software and supporting libraries for developing low-power wireless applications with Nordic Semiconductor products in the nRF52, nRF53, nRF54, nRF70, and nRF91 Series.
The SDK includes open source projects (TF-M, MCUboot, OpenThread, Matter, and the Zephyr RTOS), which are continuously integrated and redistributed with the SDK.

Release notes might refer to "experimental" support for features, which indicates that the feature is incomplete in functionality or verification, and can be expected to change in future releases.
To learn more, see :ref:`software_maturity`.

Highlights
**********

Added the following features as supported:

* Matter:

  * Matter over Thread support for nRF54LM20A and nRF54LM20B SoCs.

>   * Matter over Wi-Fi support for nRF54LM20A combined with the nRF7002-EB II shield.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * Matter over Wi-Fi® support for nRF54LM20A combined with the nRF7002-EB II shield.
```

>   * Releaseed the `Matter Cluster Editor app`_ v1.0.1 and `Matter Quick Start app`_ v1.1.0.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * Released the `Matter Cluster Editor app`_ v1.0.1 and `Matter Quick Start app`_ v1.1.0.
```

* Bluetooth®:

  * Quality of Service (QoS) channel survey feature is now supported for production.
    This feature allows devices to analyze the RF channels and avoid the ones that are more congested, helping to improve the connection quality.

> * Wi-Fi®:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Wi-Fi:
```

  * Support for WPA3-SAE using PSA APIs.

>   * Support for Wi-Fi Direct® operation mode on the nRF7002 DK, with support for Wi-Fi Direct added to the :ref:`wifi_wfa_qt_app_sample` sample.

Reviewer 4: Is ® required here? @richabp

Author: Yeah, Richa has suggested here : https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/27915#discussion_r3107358169

Reviewer 11: Yes, it's in the branding guidelines.

* nRF54L Series:

  * Support for the nRF54LM20B SoC.

* DECT NR+:

  * Modem firmware v2.0.0 support for star topology network, implementing a subset of MAC and DLC layers for easier networking using NR+.

* MCUboot:

  * The possibility to update the single slot "Loader".
  * Single slot DFU switched to the Supported state.
  * RAM Loader mode switched to the Supported state.

Added the following features as experimental:

* Bluetooth:

  * Direct Test Mode.
    This mode allows you to test the radio low level interface for RF certification, debugging, and troubleshooting.
  * LE Flushable ACL Data feature and the LE Read and Write Automatic Flush Timeout HCI commands.
    These allow devices to drop packages from the transmit queue if the timeout expires before they are sent.

* Wi-Fi:

  * Support for the nRF54LM20B SoC combined with the nRF7002-EB II shield.

* nRF54L Series:

  * Support for the new nRF54LS05A and nRF54LS05B SoCs.

> * nRFCloud:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* nRF Cloud:
```

The SDK includes open source projects (TF-M, MCUboot, OpenThread, Matter, and the Zephyr RTOS), which are continuously integrated and redistributed with the SDK.

Release notes might refer to "experimental" support for features, which indicates that the feature is incomplete in functionality or verification, and can be expected to change in future releases.
To learn more, see :ref:`software_maturity`.

Highlights
**********

Added the following features as supported:

* Matter:

  * Matter over Thread support for nRF54LM20A and nRF54LM20B SoCs.
  * Matter over Wi-Fi® support for nRF54LM20A combined with the nRF7002-EB II shield.
  * Released the `Matter Cluster Editor app`_ v1.0.1 and `Matter Quick Start app`_ v1.1.0.

* Bluetooth®:

  * Quality of Service (QoS) channel survey feature is now supported for production.
    This feature allows devices to analyze the RF channels and avoid the ones that are more congested, helping to improve the connection quality.

* Wi-Fi:

  * Support for WPA3-SAE using PSA APIs.

>   * Support for Wi-Fi Direct® operation mode on the nRF7002 DK, with support for Wi-Fi Direct added to the :ref:`wifi_wfa_qt_app_sample` sample.

Reviewer 4: (name already has application)
```suggestion
  * Support for Wi-Fi Direct® operation mode on the nRF7002 DK, with support for Wi-Fi Direct added to the :ref:`wifi_wfa_qt_app_sample`.
```

* Added:

  * A new lifecycle state (LCS) API designed for nRF54L Series devices.
  * Support for firmware loader updates using the :ref:`installer` application.

* Updated:

  * By moving the :ref:`mcuboot_with_decompression` sample to :file:`samples/dfu/compressed_update` and updated the sample name from "nRF Compression: MCUboot compressed update".
  * Renamed the existing lifecycle state (LCS) type ``lcs`` to :c:enum:`bl_storage_lcs`.
  * Replaced the ``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_GENERATE_DEFAULT_KMU_KEYFILE`` Kconfig option with :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_GENERATE_DEFAULT_KEY_FILE`.
    This change allows generating a default key file for MCUboot when using either the KMU or ITS for key storage.

    Affected samples:

    * :ref:`nrf_desktop`
    * :ref:`fast_pair_locator_tag`
    * :ref:`mcuboot_with_encryption`
    * :ref:`single_slot_sample`
    * :ref:`nrf_smp_svr_sample`
    * :ref:`mcuboot_minimal_configuration`

  * Replaced ``ExternalNcsVariantProject_Add(..)`` CMake function with the ``ExternalZephyrVariantProject_Add(..)`` function.
    The new function is defined and maintained in the Zephyr repository, providing a very similar API and functionality.

>     The old function is deprecated and kept for backward compatibility, but it will be removed in the future.

Author: @tomchy - The mcuboot_config is not a correct ref. Could you share the correct ref link.

>     The old function is deprecated and kept for backward compatibility, but it will be removed in the future.

Author: Release note is now updated.

* :ref:`nrf_smp_svr_sample` sample:

  * Updated by moving the sample to the :file:`samples/dfu/smp_svr` folder.

* :ref:`firmware_loader_entrance` sample:

  * Added the :ref:`sample documentation page <firmware_loader_entrance>`.

* :ref:`mcuboot_with_encryption` sample:

  * Added support for the nRF54H20 SoC.

Developing with nRF54L Series
=============================

* Added:

  * Experimental support for nRF54LS05B.

>   * Experimental support for nRF54LM20B.

Author: @annwoj - Can you please confirm this.

>   * Experimental support for nRF54LM20B.

Reviewer 13: @wiminordic Could you please confirm the status for LS05 device?
@wojciechpluszynski - same thing, could you please confirm the status for LM20B?

>   * Experimental support for nRF54LM20B.

Reviewer 14: Yes, LM20A and B for common functionality is expected to be production.

>   * Experimental support for nRF54LM20B.

Author: Removed Experimental for LM20B.

>   * Experimental support for nRF54LM20B.

Reviewer 15: nRF54LS05B is still experimental.

  * The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_RSA_KEY_SIZE_2048` Kconfig option is now enabled by default whenever :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_RSA_KEY_PAIR_BASIC` or :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_RSA_PUBLIC_KEY` is enabled and no other RSA key size is enabled.
  * The :ref:`app_approtect` page with more detailed information about the AP-Protect implementation types and how to configure them for each device.

  * The :ref:`API documentation section for the cryptographic drivers <crypto_drivers_api_documentation>` with links to the added API documentation for the CRACEN driver.
  * The documentation with the information about the side-channel countermeasures in the CRACEN peripheral:

    * The :ref:`ug_crypto_supported_features` page with the :ref:`ug_crypto_supported_features_countermeasures` section with information about support for the countermeasures in the CRACEN driver.
    * The :ref:`ug_kmu_guides_cracen_overview` page with the section about :ref:`ug_kmu_cracen_countermeasures`.

* Removed:

  * The ``CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_WPA3_SAE_PT`` Kconfig option and replaced it with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_KEY_TYPE_WPA3_SAE`.

>   * The ``CONFIG_PSA_WANT_ALG_WPA3_SAE`` Kconfig option and replaced it by options :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_ALG_WPA3_SAE_FIXED` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_ALG_WPA3_SAE_GDH`.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
  * The ``CONFIG_PSA_WANT_ALG_WPA3_SAE`` Kconfig option and replaced it with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_ALG_WPA3_SAE_FIXED` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_WANT_ALG_WPA3_SAE_GDH`.
```

    The workaround is applied when the :option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_USB_STACK_NEXT_DISABLE_ON_VBUS_REMOVAL` Kconfig option is enabled.
  * Application-specific Kconfig options that simplify using SEGGER J-Link RTT (:option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_LOG_RTT`) or UART (:option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_LOG_UART`) as logging backend used by the application (:option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_LOG`).
    The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOG_BACKEND_UART` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOG_BACKEND_RTT` Kconfig options are no longer enabled by default if nRF Desktop logging (:option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_LOG`) is enabled.
    These options are controlled through the newly introduced nRF Desktop application-specific Kconfig options.
    The application still uses SEGGER J-Link RTT as the default logging backend.
  * Support for the ``nrf54ls05dk/nrf54ls05b/cpuapp`` board target.
    The board target can act as either a mouse or a keyboard.
  * Support for the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20b/cpuapp`` board target.
    The board target supports the same set of configurations as the ``nrf54lm20dk/nrf54lm20a/cpuapp`` board target.

> 

Reviewer 16: The PR and its backport are merged. Please include it.

> 

Author: Updated, please check.

> 

Reviewer 16: Thanks!

  nRF Desktop shell automatically enables RTT by default (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_USE_SEGGER_RTT`).
  You can use the newly introduced application-specific Kconfig option :option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_LOG_RTT` for nRF Desktop RTT logging configuration.
  By default, this option makes the RTT log backend block the message until it is transferred to host (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOG_BACKEND_RTT_MODE_BLOCK`) instead of dropping messages that do not fit in up-buffer (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOG_BACKEND_RTT_MODE_DROP`).
  This is done to prevent dropping the newest logs.

nRF Machine Learning (Edge Impulse)
-----------------------------------

* Deprecated the :ref:`nrf_machine_learning_app` application.
  Replaced by the Gesture Recognition application in `Edge AI Add-on for nRF Connect SDK`_.

Installer (MCUboot Firmware Loader installer)
-----------------------------------------------
* Added support for the Installer application which is a helper application for the MCUboot Firmware Loader update.

Samples
=======

This section provides detailed lists of changes by :ref:`sample <samples>`.

> Bluetooth samples

Reviewer 17: yes, it's also for peripheral_lbs

> Bluetooth samples

Author: updated for peripheral_lbs as well.

  * The documentation for all Matter samples and applications to make it more consistent and easier to maintain and read.
  * Partitions mapping for the nRF7002 DK in all Matter samples.
    See the `migration guide <Migration guide for nRF Connect SDK v3.3.0_>`_ for more information.

* :ref:`matter_light_switch_sample` sample:

  * Removed the ``lit_icd`` snippet from the sample and enabled LIT ICD configuration by default.

* :ref:`matter_manufacturer_specific_sample` sample:

  * Added support for the ``NRF_MATTER_CLUSTER_INIT`` macro.

* :ref:`matter_closure_sample` sample:

  * Added support for the Closure Control cluster test event triggers.

* :ref:`matter_lock_sample` sample:

  * Added:

    * Support for the :ref:`matter_lock_sample_wifi_thread_switching` in the nRF54LM20 DK with the nRF7002-EB II shield attached.
    * Lock data storage implementation based on the ARM PSA Protected Storage API, enabled with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_LOCK_ACCESS_STORAGE_PROTECTED_STORAGE` Kconfig option.

* :ref:`matter_light_bulb_sample` sample:

  * Added support for :ref:`matter_light_bulb_aws_iot_integration` in the nRF54LM20 DK with the nRF7002-EB II shield attached.

> NFC samples

Reviewer: Please add this entry:

```
Networking samples
------------------

* :ref:`azure_iot_hub`:

  * Updated the sample for the nRF7002 DK to explicitly enable ECDH/ECDSA and RSA certificate support.

* :ref:`aws_iot`:

  * Updated the sample for the nRF7002 DK to explicitly enable ECDH/ECDSA and RSA certificate support.

* :ref:`download_sample`:

  * Updated board-specific configuration files to explicitly enable ECDH/ECDSA and RSA certificate support.

* :ref:`http_server`:

  * Updated TLS overlay files to explicitly enable ECDH/ECDSA and RSA certificate support.

* :ref:`https_client`:

  * Updated the TF-M overlay for the nRF91 Series to explicitly enable ECDH/ECDSA and RSA certificate support.

* :ref:`mqtt_sample`:

  * Updated TLS overlay files to explicitly enable ECDH/ECDSA and RSA certificate support.
```

      Deltas are now trimmed by default to prioritize smaller shadows.

* :ref:`lib_nrf_cloud_pgps` library:

  * Updated the range for the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_PGPS_NUM_PREDICTIONS` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_PGPS_REPLACEMENT_THRESHOLD` Kconfig options to values supported by nRF Cloud.
  * Fixed an issue where preemptive updates were not always performed when expected.
  * Removed the ``CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_PGPS_PREDICTION_PERIOD`` Kconfig choice and related options (``CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_PGPS_PREDICTION_PERIOD_120_MIN`` and ``CONFIG_NRF_CLOUD_PGPS_PREDICTION_PERIOD_240_MIN``).

Libraries for NFC
-----------------

* :ref:`lib_nfc_tnep` library:

  * Fixed the ``BUILD_ASSERT`` for the waiting time extension count (``_n_wait``) in the TNEP Tag API.
    It now uses ``NFC_TNEP_TAG_MAX_N_WAIT_TIME`` instead of ``NFC_TNEP_TAG_MAX_WAIT_TIME``, aligning the check with the TNEP 1.0 specification.
  * Removed the unused ``NFC_TNEP_NDEF_NLEN_SIZE`` define from the TNEP base API.

Other libraries
---------------

* Added the :ref:`lib_accel_to_angle` library for converting three-dimensional acceleration into pitch and roll angles.

> * Deprecated the :ref:`ei_wrapper` library.

Reviewer 18: @divipillai i believe Kamil mentioned this one: https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/tree/v3.3-branch/lib/nrf_802154_callbacks_dispatcher

> * Deprecated the :ref:`ei_wrapper` library.

Author: Updated, please check.
